Exercises

Exercise 1: Create Users for the Finance Team

Steps


Sign in to the Microsoft Entra admin center.
In the left menu, go to Identity > Users > All users.
Click + New user > Create new user.
Configure the first user:

User principal name: priya.finance
Display name: Priya Sharma
Let Entra auto-generate a password (note it down).



Click Review + create, then Create.
Repeat the steps to create a second user raj.finance (Display name: Raj Mehta).


Expected Output


Two new users, Priya Sharma and Raj Mehta, appear in the All users list.


Exercise 2: Organize Users into a Security Group

Steps


In the Entra admin center, go to Identity > Groups > All groups.
Click + New group.
Configure the group:

Group type: Security
Group name: Finance-Team
Membership type: Assigned



Under Members, add Priya Sharma and Raj Mehta.
Click Create.


Expected Output


A security group Finance-Team is created with two members. Managing access by group instead of by individual user is a core least-privilege best practice.


Exercise 3: Assign a Role Using RBAC (Least Privilege)

Steps


In the Azure Portal, open the Resource group (or subscription) that holds the finance resources.
Select Access control (IAM) from the left menu.
Click + Add > Add role assignment.
Choose a least-privilege role — for example, Reader (view only) instead of Contributor or Owner.
On the Members tab, select User, group, or service principal, then choose the Finance-Team group.
Click Review + assign.


Expected Output


The Finance-Team group is assigned the Reader role, giving the team visibility without the ability to modify or delete resources.


Exercise 4: Enforce Multi-Factor Authentication with a Conditional Access Policy


Note: Conditional Access requires Entra ID P1/P2. If you do not have a license, skip to the fallback at the end of this exercise and enable Security Defaults, which enforces MFA for all users.



Steps


In the Entra admin center, go to Protection > Conditional Access > Policies.
Click + New policy and name it Require MFA - Finance Team.
Under Assignments > Users, include the Finance-Team group.
Under Target resources, select All cloud apps.
Under Access controls > Grant, select Grant access, then check Require multifactor authentication.
Set Enable policy to On.
Click Create.


Fallback (no P1/P2 license):


Go to Identity > Overview > Properties.
Select Manage security defaults.
Set Security defaults to Enabled and save.


Expected Output


Finance team members are prompted to register and use MFA the next time they sign in. The policy appears as On in the Conditional Access policy list.


Exercise 5: Block Sign-ins from Outside Your Country (Named Locations)

Steps


In the Entra admin center, go to Protection > Conditional Access > Named locations.
Click + Countries location, name it Allowed-Country, and select your country (e.g., India). Save.
Go back to Policies and click + New policy named Block Foreign Sign-ins - Finance.
Under Assignments > Users, include the Finance-Team group.
Under Conditions > Locations, include Any location and exclude Allowed-Country.
Under Access controls > Grant, select Block access.
Set Enable policy to On and click Create.



Safety tip: Always exclude at least one break-glass / emergency admin account from blocking policies so you never lock yourself out of the tenant.



Expected Output


Any sign-in attempt by a finance team member from outside the allowed country is blocked, while sign-ins from inside the country succeed.


Exercise 6: Review Sign-in Logs for Monitoring

Steps


In the Entra admin center, go to Identity > Monitoring & health > Sign-in logs.
Filter the logs by the user priya.finance.
Inspect the columns for Status (Success/Failure), Conditional Access (whether a policy was applied), Location, and MFA.
Click any entry to view its detailed Activity Details, including the Conditional Access tab showing which policies fired.


Expected Output


You can see sign-in events confirming that MFA was required and the location-based policy was evaluated, proving your controls are working.


Exercise 7 (Optional): Create a User Using the Azure CLI

Steps


Open your terminal.
Sign in to Azure:


bashaz login


Create a new user in your tenant (replace <your-tenant-domain> with your .onmicrosoft.com domain):


bashaz ad user create \
  --display-name "Anita Verma" \
  --user-principal-name "anita.finance@<your-tenant-domain>.onmicrosoft.com" \
  --password "StrongP@ssw0rd!" \
  --force-change-password-next-sign-in true


Verify the user was created:


bashaz ad user list --filter "displayName eq 'Anita Verma'" --output table

Expected Output


A new user Anita Verma is created in Entra ID via the command line and is required to change the password on first sign-in.
